README.md, before:

# Autocomplete for Zsh
Autocomplete for Zsh adds **real-time type-ahead autocompletion** to Zsh.  Find
as you type, then press <kbd>Tab</kbd> to insert the top completion or
<kbd>↓</kbd>to select another completion.

> Enjoy using this software?
[Become a sponsor!](https://github.com/sponsors/marlonrichert) 💝

[![file-search](.img/file-search.gif)](https://asciinema.org/a/377611)

<sub>(The look and feel shown in images here might not be up to date.</sub>

## Other Features
Besides autocompletion, Autocomplete comes with many other useful completion
features.

### Optimized completion config
Zsh's completion system is powerful, but hard to configure.  So, let
Autocomplete [do it for you](scripts/.autocomplete.config), while providing a
manageable list of [configuration settings](#configuration) for changing the
defaults.

### Fuzzy multi-line history search
Press <kbd>Ctrl</kbd><kbd>R</kbd> to do a real-time history search listing
multiple results.

[![history-search](.img/history-search.gif)](https://asciinema.org/a/379844)

### History menu
Press <kbd>↑</kbd> to open a menu with the last 16 history items.  If the
command line is not empty, then the contents of the command line are used to
perform a fuzzy history search.

![history menu](.img/history-menu.png)

### Multi-selection
Press <kbd>Ctrl</kbd><kbd>Space</kbd> in the completion menu or the history menu
to insert more than one item.

![multi-select](.img/multi-select.png)

### Recent dirs completion
Works out of the box with zero configuration, but also lets you
[use your favorite tool for tracking directories](#use-a-custom-backend-for-recent-directories)
instead.

![recent dirs](.img/recent-dirs.png)

## Key Bindings
* Depending on your terminal, not all keybindings might be available to you.
* Instead of <kbd>Alt</kbd>, your terminal might require you to press
  <kbd>Escape</kbd>, <kbd>Option</kbd> or <kbd>Meta</kbd>.
* In most terminals, <kbd>Enter</kbd> is interchangeable with <kbd>Return</kbd>,
  but in some terminals, it is not.

### On the command line
| `main` | `emacs` | `vicmd` | `viins` | Action
| -----: | ------: | ------: | ------: | -----:
| | <kbd>Tab</kbd> | | <kbd>Tab</kbd> | Insert top completion
| <kbd>↑</kbd> | <kbd>Ctrl</kbd><kbd>P</kbd> | <kbd>K</kbd> | |  Cursor up _-or-_ [History menu](#history-menu)
| <kbd>↓</kbd> | <kbd>Ctrl</kbd><kbd>N</kbd> | <kbd>J</kbd> | | Cursor down _-or-_ Completion menu
| <kbd>Alt</kbd><kbd>↑</kbd> | <kbd>Alt</kbd><kbd>P</kbd> | <kbd>Shift</kbd><kbd>N</kbd> | | History menu (always)
| <kbd>Alt</kbd><kbd>↓</kbd> | <kbd>Alt</kbd><kbd>N</kbd> | <kbd>N</kbd> | | Completion menu (always)
| | <kbd>Ctrl</kbd><kbd>S</kbd> | <kbd>?</kbd> | | Search through _all_ menu text
| | <kbd>Ctrl</kbd><kbd>R</kbd> | <kbd>/</kbd> | | Toggle [history search mode](#real-time-history-search) on/off

### In the menus
| Key(s) | Action |
| -----: | ------
| <kbd>↑</kbd> <kbd>↓</kbd> <kbd>←</kbd> <kbd>→</kbd> | Change selection
| <kbd>Alt</kbd><kbd>↑</kbd> | Backward one group (completion only)
| <kbd>Alt</kbd><kbd>↓</kbd> | Forward one group (completion only)
| <kbd>PgUp</kbd><br><kbd>Alt</kbd><kbd>V</kbd> | Page up
| <kbd>PgDn</kbd><br><kbd>Ctrl</kbd><kbd>V</kbd> | Page down
| <kbd>Ctrl</kbd><kbd>S</kbd> | Enter search mode _-or-_ Go to next match
| <kbd>Ctrl</kbd><kbd>R</kbd> | Enter search mode _-or-_ Go to previous match
| <kbd>Tab</kbd><br><kbd>Enter</kbd> | Exit search mode _-or-_ Exit menu
| <kbd>Ctrl</kbd><kbd>Space</kbd> | Add another completion
| <kbd>Ctrl</kbd><kbd>-</kbd><br><kbd>Ctrl</kbd><kbd>/</kbd> | Remove last completion
| <kbd>Ctrl</kbd><kbd>G</kbd> | Remove all completions
| Other keys | Depends on the keymap from which you opened the menu. See the Zsh manual on [menu selection](https://zsh.sourceforge.io/Doc/Release/Zsh-Modules.html#Menu-selection).

## Requirements
Recommended:
* Tested to work with [Zsh](http://zsh.sourceforge.net) 5.8 and newer.

Minimum:
* Should theoretically work with Zsh 5.4, but I'm unable to test that.

## Installing & Updating
If you use [Znap](https://github.com/marlonrichert/zsh-snap), simply add the
following to your `.zshrc` file:
```zsh
znap source marlonrichert/zsh-autocomplete
```
Then restart your shell.

To update, do
```zsh
% znap pull
```

To uninstall, remove `znap source marlonrichert/zsh-autocomplete` from your
`.zshrc` file, then run
```zsh
% znap uninstall
```

### Manual installation
 1. Clone the repo:
    ```zsh
    % cd ~/Repos  # ...or wherever you keep your Git repos/Zsh plugins
    % git clone --depth 1 -- https://github.com/marlonrichert/zsh-autocomplete.git
    ```
 1.  Add at or near the top of your `.zshrc` file (_before_ any calls to
    `compdef`):
    ```zsh
    source ~/Repos/zsh-autocomplete/zsh-autocomplete.plugin.zsh
    ```
 1. Remove any calls to `compinit` from your `.zshrc` file.
 1. Restart your shell.

To update, do:
```zsh
% git -C ~zsh-autocomplete pull
```

To uninstall, simply undo the installation steps above in reverse order:
 1. Restore the lines you deleted in step 3.
 1. Delete the line you added in step 2.
 1. Delete the repo you created in step 1.
 1. Restart your shell.

### Other frameworks/plugin managers
To install with another Zsh framework or plugin manager, please refer to your
framework's/plugin manager's documentation for instructions.  When in doubt,
install [manually](#manually).

### Additional step for Ubuntu
If you're using Ubuntu, you additionally need to add the following to your
`.zshenv` file:
```zsh
skip_global_compinit=1
```

## Troubleshooting
Try the steps in the
[bug report template](.github/ISSUE_TEMPLATE/bug-report.md).

## Configuration
The following are the most commonly requested ways to configure Autocomplete's
behavior.  Add these to your `.zshrc` file to use them.

### Reassign <kbd>Tab</kbd>
You can reassign <kbd>Tab</kbd> to do something else than the default.  This
includes letting another plugin set it.  Here are two examples of what you can
do with this:

#### Make <kbd>Tab</kbd> and <kbd>Shift</kbd><kbd>Tab</kbd> cycle completions on the command line
```zsh
bindkey '\t' menu-complete "$terminfo[kcbt]" reverse-menu-complete
```

#### Make <kbd>Tab</kbd> go straight to the menu and cycle there
```zsh
bindkey '\t' menu-select "$terminfo[kcbt]" menu-select
bindkey -M menuselect '\t' menu-complete "$terminfo[kcbt]" reverse-menu-complete
```

### First insert the common substring
You can make any completion widget first insert the sequence of characters
that's common to all completions, if any, before inserting actual completions:
```zsh
# all Tab widgets
zstyle ':autocomplete:*complete*:*' insert-unambiguous yes

# all history widgets
zstyle ':autocomplete:*history*:*' insert-unambiguous yes

# ^S
zstyle ':autocomplete:menu-search:*' insert-unambiguous yes
```

### Make <kbd>Enter</kbd> submit the command line straight from the menu
By default, pressing <kbd>Enter</kbd> in the menu search exits the search and
pressing it otherwise in the menu exits the menu.  If you instead want to make
<kbd>Enter</kbd> _always_ submit the command line, use the following:
```zsh
bindkey -M menuselect '\r' .accept-line
```

### Add or don't add a space after certain completions
When inserting a completion, a space is added after certain types of
completions.  The default list is as follows:
```zsh
zstyle ':autocomplete:*' add-space \
    executables aliases functions builtins reserved-words commands
```
Modifying this list will change when a space is inserted.  If you change the
list to `'*'`, a space is always inserted.  If you put no elements in the list,
then a space is never inserted.

### Use a custom backend for recent directories
Autocomplete comes with its own backend for keeping track of and listing recent
directories (which uses part of
[`cdr`](https://zsh.sourceforge.io/Doc/Release/User-Contributions.html#Recent-Directories)
under the hood).  However, you can override this and supply Autocomplete with
recent directories from any source that you like.  To do so, define a function
like this:
```zsh
+autocomplete:recent-directories() {
   reply=( [code that generates an array of absolute paths] )
}
```

### Add a backend for recent files
Out of the box, Autocomplete doesn't track or offer recent files. However, it
will do so if you add a backend for it:
```zsh
+autocomplete:recent-files() {
   reply=( [code that generates an array of absolute paths] )
}
```

### Limit the number of lines shown
Normally, Autocomplete will try to one half of the terminal's height with
results, be it completions, the history menu or history search.  You can change
this number of lines overall or for each of these individually:
```zsh
# Set the value for all.
zstyle -e ':autocomplete:*' list-lines 'reply=( $(( LINES / 3 )) )'

# Override autocompletion.
zstyle -e ':autocomplete:list-choices:*' list-lines 'reply=( $(( LINES / 3 )) )'

# Override history menu.
zstyle ':autocomplete:history-search-backward:*' list-lines 16

# Override history search.
zstyle ':autocomplete:history-incremental-search-backward:*' list-lines 16
```
Note the use of `zstle -e` to create a dynamically updating value.

### Reset history key bindings to Zsh default
Add any of the following to your `.zshrc` file _after_ sourcing Autocomplete:

#### Reset <kbd>↑</kbd> and <kbd>↓</kbd>
```zsh
() {
   local -a prefix=( '\e'{\[,O} )
   local -a up=( ${^prefix}A ) down=( ${^prefix}B )
   local key=
   for key in $up[@]; do
      bindkey "$key" up-line-or-history
   done
   for key in $down[@]; do
      bindkey "$key" down-line-or-history
   done
}
```

#### Reset <kbd>Ctrl</kbd><kbd>R</kbd> and <kbd>Ctrl</kbd><kbd>S</kbd>
```
   zle -A {.,}history-incremental-search-backward
   zle -A {.,}vi-history-search-backward
   bindkey -M emacs '^S' history-incremental-search-forward
   bindkey -M vicmd '/' vi-history-search-forward
}
```

### Other settings

```zsh
# The code below sets each setting to its default values.  To change a setting,
# copy it into your `.zshrc` file and modify it there.


zstyle ':autocomplete:*' default-context ''
# '': Start each new command line with normal autocompletion.
# history-incremental-search-backward: Start in live history search mode.

zstyle ':autocomplete:*' min-delay 0.05  # seconds (float)
# Wait this many seconds for typing to stop, before showing completions.

zstyle ':autocomplete:*' min-input 1  # characters (int)
# Wait until this many characters have been typed, before showing completions.

zstyle ':autocomplete:*' ignored-input '' # extended glob pattern
# '':     Always show completions.
# '..##': Don't show completions for the current word, if it consists of two
#         or more dots.


source /path/to/zsh-autocomplete.plugin.zsh
```

## Author
© 2020-2023 [Marlon Richert](https://github.com/marlonrichert)

## License
This project is licensed under the MIT License.  See the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file
for details.

Commit message:

Rework rest of settings in Readme

README.md, after:

# Autocomplete for Zsh
Autocomplete for Zsh adds **real-time type-ahead autocompletion** to Zsh.  Find
as you type, then press <kbd>Tab</kbd> to insert the top completion or
<kbd>↓</kbd>to select another completion.

> Enjoy using this software?
[Become a sponsor!](https://github.com/sponsors/marlonrichert) 💝

[![file-search](.img/file-search.gif)](https://asciinema.org/a/377611)

<sub>(The look and feel shown in images here might not be up to date.</sub>

## Other Features
Besides autocompletion, Autocomplete comes with many other useful completion
features.

### Optimized completion config
Zsh's completion system is powerful, but hard to configure.  So, let
Autocomplete [do it for you](scripts/.autocomplete.config), while providing a
manageable list of [configuration settings](#configuration) for changing the
defaults.

### Fuzzy multi-line history search
Press <kbd>Ctrl</kbd><kbd>R</kbd> to do a real-time history search listing
multiple results.

[![history-search](.img/history-search.gif)](https://asciinema.org/a/379844)

### History menu
Press <kbd>↑</kbd> to open a menu with the last 16 history items.  If the
command line is not empty, then the contents of the command line are used to
perform a fuzzy history search.

![history menu](.img/history-menu.png)

### Multi-selection
Press <kbd>Ctrl</kbd><kbd>Space</kbd> in the completion menu or the history menu
to insert more than one item.

![multi-select](.img/multi-select.png)

### Recent dirs completion
Works out of the box with zero configuration, but also lets you
[use your favorite tool for tracking directories](#use-a-custom-backend-for-recent-directories)
instead.

![recent dirs](.img/recent-dirs.png)

## Key Bindings
* Depending on your terminal, not all keybindings might be available to you.
* Instead of <kbd>Alt</kbd>, your terminal might require you to press
  <kbd>Escape</kbd>, <kbd>Option</kbd> or <kbd>Meta</kbd>.
* In most terminals, <kbd>Enter</kbd> is interchangeable with <kbd>Return</kbd>,
  but in some terminals, it is not.

### On the command line
| `main` | `emacs` | `vicmd` | `viins` | Action
| -----: | ------: | ------: | ------: | -----:
| | <kbd>Tab</kbd> | | <kbd>Tab</kbd> | Insert top completion
| <kbd>↑</kbd> | <kbd>Ctrl</kbd><kbd>P</kbd> | <kbd>K</kbd> | |  Cursor up _-or-_ [History menu](#history-menu)
| <kbd>↓</kbd> | <kbd>Ctrl</kbd><kbd>N</kbd> | <kbd>J</kbd> | | Cursor down _-or-_ Completion menu
| <kbd>Alt</kbd><kbd>↑</kbd> | <kbd>Alt</kbd><kbd>P</kbd> | <kbd>Shift</kbd><kbd>N</kbd> | | History menu (always)
| <kbd>Alt</kbd><kbd>↓</kbd> | <kbd>Alt</kbd><kbd>N</kbd> | <kbd>N</kbd> | | Completion menu (always)
| | <kbd>Ctrl</kbd><kbd>S</kbd> | <kbd>?</kbd> | | Search through _all_ menu text
| | <kbd>Ctrl</kbd><kbd>R</kbd> | <kbd>/</kbd> | | Toggle [history search mode](#real-time-history-search) on/off

### In the menus
| Key(s) | Action |
| -----: | ------
| <kbd>↑</kbd> <kbd>↓</kbd> <kbd>←</kbd> <kbd>→</kbd> | Change selection
| <kbd>Alt</kbd><kbd>↑</kbd> | Backward one group (completion only)
| <kbd>Alt</kbd><kbd>↓</kbd> | Forward one group (completion only)
| <kbd>PgUp</kbd><br><kbd>Alt</kbd><kbd>V</kbd> | Page up
| <kbd>PgDn</kbd><br><kbd>Ctrl</kbd><kbd>V</kbd> | Page down
| <kbd>Ctrl</kbd><kbd>S</kbd> | Enter search mode _-or-_ Go to next match
| <kbd>Ctrl</kbd><kbd>R</kbd> | Enter search mode _-or-_ Go to previous match
| <kbd>Tab</kbd><br><kbd>Enter</kbd> | Exit search mode _-or-_ Exit menu
| <kbd>Ctrl</kbd><kbd>Space</kbd> | Add another completion
| <kbd>Ctrl</kbd><kbd>-</kbd><br><kbd>Ctrl</kbd><kbd>/</kbd> | Remove last completion
| <kbd>Ctrl</kbd><kbd>G</kbd> | Remove all completions
| Other keys | Depends on the keymap from which you opened the menu. See the Zsh manual on [menu selection](https://zsh.sourceforge.io/Doc/Release/Zsh-Modules.html#Menu-selection).

## Requirements
Recommended:
* Tested to work with [Zsh](http://zsh.sourceforge.net) 5.8 and newer.

Minimum:
* Should theoretically work with Zsh 5.4, but I'm unable to test that.

## Installing & Updating
If you use [Znap](https://github.com/marlonrichert/zsh-snap), simply add the
following to your `.zshrc` file:
```zsh
znap source marlonrichert/zsh-autocomplete
```
Then restart your shell.

To update, do
```zsh
% znap pull
```

To uninstall, remove `znap source marlonrichert/zsh-autocomplete` from your
`.zshrc` file, then run
```zsh
% znap uninstall
```

### Manual installation
 1. Clone the repo:
    ```zsh
    % cd ~/Repos  # ...or wherever you keep your Git repos/Zsh plugins
    % git clone --depth 1 -- https://github.com/marlonrichert/zsh-autocomplete.git
    ```
 1.  Add at or near the top of your `.zshrc` file (_before_ any calls to
    `compdef`):
    ```zsh
    source ~/Repos/zsh-autocomplete/zsh-autocomplete.plugin.zsh
    ```
 1. Remove any calls to `compinit` from your `.zshrc` file.
 1. Restart your shell.

To update, do:
```zsh
% git -C ~zsh-autocomplete pull
```

To uninstall, simply undo the installation steps above in reverse order:
 1. Restore the lines you deleted in step 3.
 1. Delete the line you added in step 2.
 1. Delete the repo you created in step 1.
 1. Restart your shell.

### Other frameworks/plugin managers
To install with another Zsh framework or plugin manager, please refer to your
framework's/plugin manager's documentation for instructions.  When in doubt,
install [manually](#manually).

### Additional step for Ubuntu
If you're using Ubuntu, you additionally need to add the following to your
`.zshenv` file:
```zsh
skip_global_compinit=1
```

## Troubleshooting
Try the steps in the
[bug report template](.github/ISSUE_TEMPLATE/bug-report.md).

## Configuration
The following are the most commonly requested ways to configure Autocomplete's
behavior.  Add these to your `.zshrc` file to use them.

### Reassign <kbd>Tab</kbd>
You can reassign <kbd>Tab</kbd> to do something else than the default.  This
includes letting another plugin set it.  Here are two examples of what you can
do with this:

#### Make <kbd>Tab</kbd> and <kbd>Shift</kbd><kbd>Tab</kbd> cycle completions on the command line
```zsh
bindkey '\t' menu-complete "$terminfo[kcbt]" reverse-menu-complete
```

#### Make <kbd>Tab</kbd> go straight to the menu and cycle there
```zsh
bindkey '\t' menu-select "$terminfo[kcbt]" menu-select
bindkey -M menuselect '\t' menu-complete "$terminfo[kcbt]" reverse-menu-complete
```

### First insert the common substring
You can make any completion widget first insert the sequence of characters
that's common to all completions, if any, before inserting actual completions:
```zsh
# all Tab widgets
zstyle ':autocomplete:*complete*:*' insert-unambiguous yes

# all history widgets
zstyle ':autocomplete:*history*:*' insert-unambiguous yes

# ^S
zstyle ':autocomplete:menu-search:*' insert-unambiguous yes
```

### Make <kbd>Enter</kbd> submit the command line straight from the menu
By default, pressing <kbd>Enter</kbd> in the menu search exits the search and
pressing it otherwise in the menu exits the menu.  If you instead want to make
<kbd>Enter</kbd> _always_ submit the command line, use the following:
```zsh
bindkey -M menuselect '\r' .accept-line
```

### Add or don't add a space after certain completions
When inserting a completion, a space is added after certain types of
completions.  The default list is as follows:
```zsh
zstyle ':autocomplete:*' add-space \
    executables aliases functions builtins reserved-words commands
```
Modifying this list will change when a space is inserted.  If you change the
list to `'*'`, a space is always inserted.  If you put no elements in the list,
then a space is never inserted.

### Use a custom backend for recent directories
Autocomplete comes with its own backend for keeping track of and listing recent
directories (which uses part of
[`cdr`](https://zsh.sourceforge.io/Doc/Release/User-Contributions.html#Recent-Directories)
under the hood).  However, you can override this and supply Autocomplete with
recent directories from any source that you like.  To do so, define a function
like this:
```zsh
+autocomplete:recent-directories() {
   reply=( [code that generates an array of absolute paths] )
}
```

### Add a backend for recent files
Out of the box, Autocomplete doesn't track or offer recent files. However, it
will do so if you add a backend for it:
```zsh
+autocomplete:recent-files() {
   reply=( [code that generates an array of absolute paths] )
}
```

### Start each new line in history search mode
```zsh
zstyle ':autocomplete:*' default-context history-incremental-search-backward
```

### Wait with autocompletion until typing stops for a certain amount of seconds
```zsh
zstyle ':autocomplete:*' min-delay 0.05  # seconds (float)
```

### Don't show completion for current word, if it consists of two or more dots
```zsh
zstyle ':autocomplete:*' ignored-input '..##'
```

## Limit the number of lines shown
Normally, Autocomplete will try to one half of the terminal's height with
results, be it completions, the history menu or history search.  You can change
this number of lines overall or for each of these individually:
```zsh
# Set the value for all.
zstyle -e ':autocomplete:*' list-lines 'reply=( $(( LINES / 3 )) )'

# Override autocompletion.
zstyle -e ':autocomplete:list-choices:*' list-lines 'reply=( $(( LINES / 3 )) )'

# Override history menu.
zstyle ':autocomplete:history-search-backward:*' list-lines 16

# Override history search.
zstyle ':autocomplete:history-incremental-search-backward:*' list-lines 16
```
`zstle -e` creates a dynamic value.

### Reset history key bindings to Zsh default
Add any of the following to your `.zshrc` file _after_ sourcing Autocomplete:

#### Reset <kbd>↑</kbd> and <kbd>↓</kbd>
```zsh
() {
   local -a prefix=( '\e'{\[,O} )
   local -a up=( ${^prefix}A ) down=( ${^prefix}B )
   local key=
   for key in $up[@]; do
      bindkey "$key" up-line-or-history
   done
   for key in $down[@]; do
      bindkey "$key" down-line-or-history
   done
}
```

#### Reset <kbd>Ctrl</kbd><kbd>R</kbd> and <kbd>Ctrl</kbd><kbd>S</kbd>
```
   zle -A {.,}history-incremental-search-backward
   zle -A {.,}vi-history-search-backward
   bindkey -M emacs '^S' history-incremental-search-forward
   bindkey -M vicmd '/' vi-history-search-forward
}
```

## Author
© 2020-2023 [Marlon Richert](https://github.com/marlonrichert)

## License
This project is licensed under the MIT License.  See the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file
for details.
